Blog: How to brand your startup (#7930)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/brand.md

---
date: 2023-06-25

> title: How to brand your startup

Reviewer: maybe more like...

How to actually brand your startup
How to brand your startup so it isn't boring

just to give it a bit more oomph

> title: How to brand your startup

Author: ```suggestion
title: How to brand your startup so it isn't boring
```

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - james-hawkins
category: CEO diaries
---

The world would be a lot more fun if most startups didn't seem to have experienced a personality vasectomy.

> I believe humans have evolved to conform - when we all lived in the wilderness, staying alive required you to fit in with a tribe, after all. Fast forward that background to today and, amongst other things (!), the majority of the world's software companies feel the same as each other.

Reviewer: i think this very sweeping point, taking in all of human evolution, kinda weakens your argument. humans haven't evolved to conform, humans who create software companies tend to be somewhat similar humans solving somewhat similar problems... hence the uniformity. would suggest either cutting or reworking this to narrow down your point a bit

> ## There are good reasons for this, you idiot

Reviewer: the 'voice' of the crossheads changes. here it's the 'dissenting voice' but lower down the crossheads just become crossheads. think we need to pick one and stick with it

I bet there are. You want to get the Minimum Viable Product built and validated.

You need to make money, you're going to fail without it.

Creating a pretty website won't help with that.

> ## But... will it?!

Reviewer: per point above re: crossheads, i think we're also maybe using a couple too many right at the start. you could have a version of this back-and-forth conversation between the crossheads and the main text without crossheads. so...

Creating a pretty website won't help with that, right? Wrong.

When we knew that PostHog was something we wanted to launch, we questioned...

etc.

Maybe!

When we knew that PostHog was something we wanted to launch, we questioned how we'd get the most users signed up.

The product on launch day was going to be free, but we still asked ourselves: "what would stop me from using this thing?"

> Despite being free, users would be wary of wasting their time trying to deploy a badly supported, broken piece of open source software, or worse - it not handling their data securely. These are both things you'd associate with the software produced by a 2 person startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite being free, users would be wary of wasting their time trying to deploy a badly supported, broken piece of open source software, or worse - it not handling their data securely. These are both things you'd associate with the software produced by a two-person startup.
```

> Before a user even gets into the software or glances at the code first, the majority will turn away _at_ the website, the docs and the readme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before a user even gets into the software or glances at the code, the majority will turn away _at_ the website, the docs and the readme.
```

As a counter example, an obviously templated or one-pager style website:

> * signals the product may not be secure, a lack of demonstrated competence in the website shows a lack of attention to detail - if a startup doesn't care about having their own design, will they care about security?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Signals the product may not be secure, a lack of demonstrated competence in the website shows a lack of attention to detail. If a startup doesn't care about having their own design, will they care about security?
```

> * signals the team behind the product isn't very strong, and won't improve quickly over time, or become a "must use" tool - those startup launches that everyone hears about? They've put energy into their appearance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Signals the team behind the product isn't very strong, and won't improve quickly over time, or become a "must use" tool. Those startup launches that everyone hears about? They've put energy into their appearance.
```

> * signals the product may not exist in a few more weeks, which would be a waste of time - when it's obvious the website was thrown together in a day - if the team don't look invested in their company, why would you put your own time in?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Signals the product may not exist in a few more weeks, which would be a waste of time. When it's obvious the website was thrown together in a day, if the team don't look invested in their company, why would you put your own time in?
```

> I admit this is frustrating - it is extra time and effort into something "superficial" - just remember, you are providing your product to human beings, take advantage of their pattern recognition (it also helped them survive in the wild).

Reviewer: it feels like a bit of a stretch to say, even if it's a bit in jest, that the pattern recognition that helped us survive in the wild also influences what saas product people go with. i think fine to make the pattern recognition point, just don't nod back to our hunter-gatherer days...?

> ## Your company needs to stand for something

Reviewer: see point above re what voice is 'speaking' in the crossheads

> Take two examples:

Reviewer: two examples of what? we should also say these related to posthog as that's not clear

* Open source product analytics
* We equip every developer to build successful products

There is a tradeoff between the two.

> The first is very clear. We started with it when this is what we had.

Reviewer: 'We started with this when this is what we had' confused me. you mean, like...

This was what our company stood for when TKTKTK.

something like that would be clearer

As we became more well known, and as we added lots of products into our platform, we shifted to the latter. This is a better reflection of _why_ our company exists - it is more than just a piece of software. We introduced it because the company was getting larger, and the scope of what we were setting out to achieve had increased. We now have 8+ products, and we produce a ton of content to help engineers build better products. The need for total clarity wasn't as important later on, relative to the need for us standing for something. It was necessary to start small then widen.

## Create your brand for someone

One of the most important things we did was to create an Ideal Customer Profile. When we launched, we weren't sure quite how focused we'd need to be on engineers "vs" product managers.

> We realized, after launching, that we could go all in on engineers (and technical founders) - they make up around 80% of our users. Our brand (and product) has become more oriented for these users as a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We realized, after launching, that we could go all in on engineers (and technical founders) - they make up around 80% of our users. Our brand (and product) has become more oriented towards these users as a result.
```

* We added a "you'll hate PostHog if" section to our homepage, which calls out many pet hates that engineers have when trying to buy, install and use more traditionally-targeted software that they are made to implement
* We chose a more flexible pricing model - it's far more complex, but it's much better value. We felt more technical people would be happier than non technical people coping with more complexity to get a better deal. We want developers to be able to manage their spend with us across our eight products, not a "single price".
* In the product, we worked on SQL access so technical people could get to the underlying data to debug things.
* We redesigned our entire UX to have higher information density, dark mode and more flexibility.

## ... but your brand must be a reflection of _you_

We have often been impressed at the level of polish that others can acheive.

Quoting Cory, our lead designer: "We aren't the best in the world at being polished, but we can be the best in the world at being ourselves".

We sometimes make business decisions based on who we are, and what we want to do - not always what may, for example, generate the most revenue growth.

> For example, we set out initially expecting to have an open core model. We'd offer open source software, and some people in big enterprises, would self host and pay for the party for everyone else. We felt this would work as there was no real competition, whereas in cloud, we had lots of competitors with over $100M in annual revenue. However, we simply love shipping new features, and after our first hackathon, we wound up with session replay (ie a new feature, big enough to be its own product), which took off and this resulted in a multi-product approach. As a result, we could compete in cloud by being way wider than everyone else. Eventually, we removed our paid self hosted offering entirely, went all in on multi product in cloud, focused on "getting in first" with earlier stage companies instead of the largest enterprises, and our motivation, ambition and growth all took off as a result. And yes we kept the open source product - it's more expensive though than cloud for the majority of users because you have to host it and we have big free tiers.

Reviewer: would suggest breaking this par up

## Brand isn't just your website...

> ... it is instead how your company is experienced by others - consider your _company_ your product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... it is instead how your company is experienced by others. Your _company_ is your product.
```

Here is a non-exhaustive list, there are dozens more examples than this though:

> * it's how much you invest in each function in your company relative to each other

Reviewer: style point... these should start with a cap letter

* it's what you look for when you hire people, and it's the process you use to hire with
* how you decide what to build - do you ship features early, or do you focus on meeting the needs of your largest customer with every new thing
* how much you are design vs engineering vs product vs sales vs marketing led - how many people are in each function but also your processes for deciding what to work done
* the frequency and style with which you email your customers, for marketing, product updates or your activation flow
* the kind of people you hire into Customer Success or Sales
* the background experience of those in your marketing team
* the tone of voice on your website
* who is on your board
* how your pricing works
* how your social media works
* how helpful you are to random founders that message you
* the marketing channels you pick

> * it's what you talk about in your blog - I'm writing this piece for brand reasons (transparency / equipping developers (with knowledge) to build successful products), nothing else - I don't care or try to generate conversions from this post, I just want to leave an impression on people. And it's who I am - I'm writing this to pass the time on a long plane journey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It's what you talk about in your blog. I'm writing this piece for brand reasons (transparency / equipping developers with knowledge to build successful products), nothing else. I don't care or try to generate conversions from this post, I just want to leave an impression on people. And it's who I am - I'm writing this to pass the time on a long plane journey.
```

## You can't 80:20 everything

> A lot of design / brand work has an _increasing_ marginal return. This is because a great brand's purpose is that you stand out. You do _not_ stand out by being average!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of design or brand work has an _increasing_ marginal return. This is because a great brand's purpose is that you stand out. You do _not_ stand out by being average!
```

So, if you're serious, go nuts on your brand. Go weirdly hard.

To give you an example, we built a merch store:

> * we started with me emailing users for their address and size, manually ordering merch, it arriving at my house, and me then posting it internationally to them

Reviewer: cap letter at start of each bullet

* then we set up a store on shopify, I just threw our logo onto an amusingly wide selection of items (PostHog shower curtain, anyone?) - it was cool to just have merch for sale and a way of giving it
* then created custom components and built it into our website directly so it's perfectly integrated
* then we booked a photo shoot, got a bunch of our team to it, and took custom photos of our team wearing everything
* now we're working on limited editions of certain items to create collectible series of t shirts
* who knows what happens next!

It's not the fact we did the above with our merch store (I know people reading may be tempted to copy) - this is one activity of hundreds that builds brand.

## Doesn't this imply doing everything to a really high standard and a ridiculous workload?

> Yes. You can be iterative with it though - not everything was amazing on day one, but we'll keep improving and tweaking everything over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes. You can be iterative with it, though. Not everything was amazing on day one, but we'll keep improving and tweaking everything over time.
```

---
date: 2024-08-15
title: How to brand your startup so it isn't boring
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - james-hawkins
tags:
- CEO diaries
- Culture
- Marketing
- Growth
crosspost:
- Blog
- Founders
---

The world would be more fun if most startups hadn't undergone a personality vasectomy.

Be it the human instinct for conformity, or the inevitable groupthink of similar people solving similar problems, the majority of the world's software companies feel samey.

There's no shortage of excuses for this. First, you want to get the Minimum Viable Product built and validated. Next, you need to make money; you're going to fail without it.

Creating a pretty website won't help with either, right?

Wrong.

## "What would stop _me_ from using this thing?"

> This was the most important conversation Tim and I had before launching PostHog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was the most important conversation [Tim](https://posthog.com/community/profiles/27730) and I had before launching PostHog.
```

That's why we set out to create a website and brand that felt both unique and intentional, including a [public handbook](/handbook) that explained what we were doing, why, and how.

As a counter example, an obviously templated or one-pager style website signals:

1. **The product may not be secure.** If a startup doesn't care about having their own website design, will they care about security? A lack of demonstrated competence shows a lack of attention to detail.

2. **The team behind the product isn't very strong.** The product probably won't improve quickly, or become a "must use" tool. Those startup launches that everyone hears about? They've put energy into their appearance.

3. **The product may not exist in a few more weeks.** Why should a potential customer invest time in a product if it's obvious the team making it threw its website together in a day, or ripped it from an existing template?

So, as frustrating as it might be to spend extra time and effort on something "superficial" like a website, remember you're providing your product to human beings. Everyone judges books by their covers.

## Your company needs to stand for something

> Take two examples:

Reviewer: two examples of _what_?

> Take two examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take these two examples of missions for PostHog:
```

* Open-source product analytics
* We equip every developer to build successful products

There is a trade-off between the two.

The first is very clear. We started with it when this is what we had.

> As we became more well-known, and as we added lots of products into our platform, we shifted to the latter. This is a better reflection of _why_ our company exists – it is more than just a piece of software. 

Reviewer: "shifted to the latter" _what_?

> As we became more well-known, and as we added lots of products into our platform, we shifted to the latter. This is a better reflection of _why_ our company exists – it is more than just a piece of software. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we became more well-known, and as we added lots of products into our platform, we shifted to the latter mission. It's a better reflection of _why_ our company exists – it's more than just a piece of software. 
```

> We introduced it because the company was getting larger, and the scope of what we were setting out to achieve had expanded. We now have 8+ products, and we produce a ton of content to help engineers build better products. 

Reviewer: "We introduced it"

We introduced _what_?

> The need for total clarity wasn't as important later on, relative to the need for us standing for something. It was necessary to start small then widen.

Reviewer: the need for total clarity in... what?

Reviewer: it's necessary to start small then widen... what?

Reviewer 2: This is hard to parse generally. Will ask JH for clarification

## You need to create your brand for someone...

One of the most important things we did was to [create an Ideal Customer Profile](/newsletter/ideal-customer-profile-framework).

> When we launched, we weren't sure quite how focused we'd need to be on engineers vs product managers. We realized, after launching, that we could go all in on engineers and technical founders, who make up around 80% of our users. Our brand and product has become more oriented towards these users as a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we launched, we weren't sure quite how focused we'd need to be on engineers versus product managers. After launching, we realized that we could go all-in on engineers and technical founders, who make up around 80% of our users. Our brand and product has become more oriented towards these users as a result.
```

> When we launched, we weren't sure quite how focused we'd need to be on engineers versus product managers. After launching, we realized that we could go all-in on engineers and technical founders, who make up around 80% of our users. Our brand and product has become more oriented towards these users as a result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we launched, we weren't sure quite how focused we'd need to be on engineers versus product managers. After launching, we realized that we could go all-in on engineers and technical founders, who now make up around 80% of our users. Our brand and product has become more oriented towards these users as a result.
```

> Here are some specific ways we got more specific for this audience after we clarified it:

Reviewer: clarified feels weird here. zeroed-in on it? focused on it?

Reviewer: and is the rep on 'specific' intentional? feels a bit clumsy

Reviewer 2: it is not

> Here are some specific ways we got more specific for this audience after we clarified it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some ways we got more specific for this audience after we zeroed-in on it:
```

* We added API examples to our website.

> * We added a "you'll hate PostHog if" section to our homepage, which calls out many pet hates that engineers have when trying to buy, install and use more traditionally-targeted software that they are made to implement.

Reviewer: screenshot of the 'hate' section here?

* We chose a more flexible pricing model – it's far more complex, but it's [much better value](/blog/analytics-pricing). We felt more technical people would be happier than non-technical people coping with more complexity to get a better deal. We want developers to be able to manage their spend with us across our eight products, not a "single price".

> * In the product, we worked on [SQL access](/docs/hogql), so technical people could get to the underlying data to debug things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the product, we worked on [SQL access](/docs/hogql), so technical people could get to the underlying data and debug things.
```

* We [redesigned our entire UX](/blog/posthog-as-a-dev-tool) to have higher information density, dark mode and more flexibility.

## ...but your brand must be a reflection of _you_

We have often been impressed at the level of polish that others can achieve.

> Quoting Cory, our lead designer: "We aren't the best in the world at being polished, but we can be the best in the world at being ourselves".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quoting [Cory](https://posthog.com/community/profiles/30200), our lead designer: "We aren't the best in the world at being polished, but we can be the best in the world at being ourselves".
```

We sometimes make business decisions based on who we are, and what we want to do – not always what may, for example, generate the most revenue growth.

> For example, we set out initially expecting to have an open core model. We'd offer open-source software, and some people in big enterprises, would self-host and pay for the party for everyone else. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, initially we planned to have an open core model. We'd offer open-source software, and some people in big enterprises, would self-host and pay for the party for everyone else. 
```

> We felt this would work as there was no real competition, whereas in cloud we had lots of competitors with over $100M in annual revenue. However, we simply love shipping new features, and after our first hackathon, we wound up with session replay (i.e. a new feature big enough to be its own product), which took off, and this resulted in a multi-product approach. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We felt this would work as there was no real competition, whereas in cloud we had lots of competitors with over $100m in annual revenue. However, we simply love shipping new features, and after our first hackathon, we wound up with session replay (i.e. a new feature big enough to be its own product), which took off, and this resulted in a multi-product approach. 
```

> As a result, we could compete in cloud by being way wider than everyone else. Eventually, we removed our paid self-hosted offering entirely, went all in on multi-product in cloud, focused on "getting in first" with earlier-stage companies instead of the largest enterprises, and our motivation, ambition and growth all took off as a result. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, we could compete in cloud by being way wider than everyone else. Eventually, we removed our paid, self-hosted offering entirely, and went all in on multi-product in cloud, focused on "getting in first" with earlier-stage companies instead of the largest enterprises. Our motivation, ambition and growth all took off as a result. 
```

And yes we kept the open-source product, though we stress it's for hobbyists because it's cheaper and easier for companies to have us host if for them.

## Your brand isn't just your website...

...it's how your company is experienced by others. Your _company_ is your product and:

* How much you invest in each function in your company relative to each other.
* What you look for when you hire people, and it's the process you use to hire with.

> * How you decide what to build – do you ship features early, or do you focus on meeting the needs of your largest customer with every new thing?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How you decide what to build. Do you ship features early, or do you focus on meeting the needs of your largest customer with every new thing?
```

> * How much you are design vs engineering vs product vs sales vs marketing-led – how many people are in each function, but also your processes for deciding what to work done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How much you are design vs. engineering vs. product vs. sales vs. marketing-led. How many people are in each function, but also your processes for deciding what to work done.
```

* The frequency and style with which you email your customers, for marketing, product updates or your activation flow.
* The kind of people you hire into customer success or sales.
* The background experience of those in your marketing team.
* The tone of voice on your website.
* Who is on your board.
* How your pricing works.
* How your social media works.
* How helpful you are to random founders that message you.
* The marketing channels you pick.
* What you talk about in your blog. I'm writing this piece for brand reasons (transparency / equipping developers with knowledge to build successful products), nothing else. I don't care or try to generate conversions from this post, I just want to leave an impression on people. And it's who I am – I'm writing this to pass the time on a long plane journey.

## You can't 80:20 everything

A lot of design or brand work has an _increasing_ marginal return. This is because a great brand's purpose is that you stand out. You do _not_ stand out by being average!

So, if you're serious, go nuts on your brand. Go weirdly hard.

To give you an example, we built a [merch store](/merch):

> * We started with me emailing users for their address and size, ordering merch and having it delivered to my house, and me then posting it internationally to them. [Do things that don't scale](https://paulgraham.com/ds.html)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We started with me emailing users for their address and size, ordering merch and having it delivered to my house, and me then posting it internationally to them. [Do things that don't scale](https://paulgraham.com/ds.html).
```

Reviewer: lotta ! in this section, be good to cut one

* Next, we set up a store on Shopify. I just threw our logo onto an amusingly wide selection of items – PostHog shower curtain, anyone? It was cool to just have merch for sale and a way of giving it.

* Then we created custom components and built it into our website directly, so it's perfectly integrated.

* Then we booked a photo shoot and took custom photos of our team wearing everything.

* Now we're working on limited editions of certain items to create collectible series of t-shirts

Who knows what happens next!

This single thing is easy enough to copy, but it's just one activity among hundreds that builds a brand.

## Doesn't this imply doing everything to a really high standard and a ridiculous workload?

Yes. You can be iterative with it, though. Not everything was amazing on day one, but we keep improving and tweaking everything over time.

> So, get out there, and be bold

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So get out there, and be bold
```

If your brand isn't going to turn off some people that _might_ have bought your product, then it isn't strong enough to stand out.

> Engage your _best_ customers with your brand, and put off your _worst_ ones.

Reviewer: personal preference but i don't think the italics work here. you wouldn't put that much emphasis on 'best' and 'worst' if you were saying this out loud so it makes it scan weird. i'd remove 'em, but up to you

> Engage your _best_ customers with your brand, and put off your _worst_ ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Engage your best customers with your brand, and put off your worst ones.
```
